Kyiv CNN — The air at the Ukrainian military recruitment office where a 30-year-old hairdresser is being interviewed is filled with anxiety. The man has no military experience and is unsure whether any of his skills would be useful. At one point, the recruiter jokingly suggests that he might be able to give everyone a nice haircut.

But the man – who asked to remain anonymous given his pending military status – is there anyway. “The time has come,” he told CNN.

Under Ukraine’s new mobilization law, which came into effect on May 18, Ukrainian men are now facing a choice: Comply and face the possibility of being sent to the frontlines, or try to evade and risk penalties and condemnation.

The hairdresser has chosen to pre-empt the choice and volunteered, becoming one of six men to be interviewed at the Da Vinci Wolves Battalion’s recruitment center in Kyiv that day. The office is housed in an ordinary residential building, hidden from the outside world. Inside though, the walls are decorated with photos and big banners showing the logo of the battalion, a drawing of three teeth-baring wolves inside a stylized Ukrainian trident. The unit’s recruitment slogan is “Everyone will fight” and the recruiter’s laptop is covered in stickers, one of them saying “Your pack is waiting for you.”

Ukraine has made no secret of the urgent need to recruit more people as it tries to defend itself against the Russian aggression. While the government doesn’t reveal the number of dead and wounded, estimates made by experts speak of hundreds of thousands of casualties on both sides of the conflict since Russia launched its full-scale invasion in February 2022.

One Ukrainian commander who asked not to be named for security reasons said the personnel shortages are having devastating effects on the battlefield.

“If there had been 1,000 to 1,500 more servicemen in Avdiivka, we would have protected the weak spots through which the enemy entered. … If we had more people, we would have held out much longer,” he told CNN of the eastern industrial city, which fell to Russian forces in February after Ukraine held it for more than a decade.

Making the case for a new mobilization, Yurii Sodol, the commander of the Joint Forces of Ukraine’s military, told Ukrainian lawmakers last month that Russian troops outnumbered Ukrainian “seven to 10 times” in eastern Ukraine.

This lack of personnel is putting immense pressure on those who are already serving.

“The war is still going on and mobilization is essential. People who have been fighting for two years are tired. Some are going crazy,” said Yaroslav Galas, who is currently serving with the 128th Mountain Assault Brigade.

“Soldiers need proper rest for several months. They need to heal, relax and forget. They need to spend the money they have earned with sweat and blood, to solve their economic and personal issues,” he told CNN.

To make the recruitment process more efficient and more transparent, the new law requires all Ukrainian men between the ages of 18 and 60 to register with the military and always have their documents on them.

However, only men aged 25 to 60 are subject to mobilization under the new law. The lower limit has been slashed by two years from 27 years, but it’s unlikely to make much difference because of Ukraine’s demographic challenges.

High emigration and low birth rates in the 1990s and 2000s mean there are far fewer people currently in their 20s, compared to those in their 30s and 40s.

Women who have medical or pharmaceutical qualifications must also register with the military, although they are not required to serve.

The new rules have been controversial – the draft law was amended more than 4,000 times during the approval process.

‘Desire to fight’

It is unclear how many people will end up being called up. Late last year, the leader of President Volodymyr Zelensky’s Servant of the People faction in parliament said the military was looking for an extra 500,000 servicemen and women. But the Commander-in-Chief of Ukrainian Armed Forces Oleksandr Syrskyi said recently that any increase in numbers would likely be significantly lower.

Some military officers are already questioning whether it will work. Their main worry is that they’ll end up with units full of men who are only there because someone forced them to be.

“We still want people to join voluntarily. Because there is a big difference between someone who was drafted into the army and someone who went to defend their homeland,” said Dmytro Kulibaba, a soldier with the 114th Territorial Defense Brigade.

“The desire to fight the enemy is very important, in addition to training, equipment and preparedness,” he told CNN.

Galas said that many people are worried that if they get drafted, they will be automatically sent to the frontlines – which he said is not the case.

“If you are a specialist, for example, who in civilian life was engaged in IT, accounting, project management, even cooks, clerks, then the Armed Forces also need you … and you can also make a fairly large contribution to the common victory by joining the Armed Forces,” he said. “We have a separate drone unit who are a little further away from the frontline. People who are good at electronics, even those who like to play computer games, will quickly master this specialty.”
